Hi everyone,
I'm Lena Groeger, a news apps developer at ProPublica.
I'm going to be talking about timelines – how they've been used in the past and how you can make and use them yourself.

So I'm going to back up a little bit at the beginning and explore lots of ways people have tried to answer this question: how do we represent the past?

And, the question of how to display time has a long history, but the timeline as we know it didn't really appear until the middle of the 18th century. Here's one of the first timelines, a series of stacked lines that represent a different people, in this case different scientists who lived at the same time, since the year 1000.

Here's another old timeline, which shows the history of the world. It's incredibly detailed and complex, but uses the same method of stacking lines to show overlap and events that happened at the same time in different parts of the world.

But timelines don't have to be ridiulously complicated, they can be pretty simple. As 2015 is the year of the future in Back to the Future 2, I thought this would be an appropriate time to reflect on Doc's timeline. Right, we all got that that line meant we were stuck in this horribly bad alternate future. Ok, maybe we didn't all get it, the movie gets complicated, but in any case, we knew he was talking about time.

Here's a line chart that also doubles as a timeline, showing auto fatalies over time.  Note that the x axis is not time, its Miles Driven, so we end up with this little flip in the middle during the energry crisis when people drove less and so deaths went down.

Timelines can also map out complex topic, this is a grid of when movies were released compared to the date they were set in, either past present or future.

Lines can also show an opinion, like apparently that 1953 was really really teriible.

We can find analogs in real life for timelines, like sediment layers that each were created and now represent eras of history.

Here's another real life timeline, but these lines are in a circle. Rings have been used again and again to display time, and I think probably the idea for this circular representation of time came from trees. I don't know that for sure, I could totally be making it up, but it makes sense to me.

Here's another spiral shaped timeline representing the different periods of life on earth.

Then there are timelines that help us keep track of moving parts, in this case its movie characters and how they interact in movies. For those of you who have seen Primer, this is 100% accurate.

Lines can also be helpful for diagramming out time itself, and our notions of what makes a particular time "now".

Lines can show change and evolution, like this chart that chronicles the rise and falls of different pop and rock bands from the 50's on.

Timelines can also help us predict the future. Here's a collection of inventions and accomplishments in the computing world. After we get through the past, the NY Times actually asked people to write in when they thought future inventions would occur, a sort of crowd-sourced timeline of events that hadn't happened yet.

Timelines can help us plan out how we're going to get somehwere or what we have to do during the day, lots of times this shows us as a vertical line on mobile apps.

Lines can also show us inequalities, like how few women there are in the Senate.




